FlowCoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System
            with CPU-Only RandomX Proof-of-Work

                    Kristian Pilatovich
                pilatovichkristian2@gmail.com


Abstract. A purely peer-to-peer version of electronic cash would allow
online payments to be sent directly from one party to another without
going through a financial institution. Digital signatures provide part
of the solution, but the main benefits are lost if a trusted third
party is still required to prevent double-spending. We propose a
solution to the double-spending problem using a peer-to-peer network
that secures its ledger with RandomX, a CPU-oriented memory-hard
proof-of-work designed by the Monero project and deployed on their
mainnet since November 2019 with no ASIC having appeared in the five
years since. RandomX generates a random instruction stream per block,
executes it in a virtual machine against a 2 GiB deterministic dataset,
and finalises with AES-based mixing; the result is that general-purpose
CPUs outperform both GPUs and bespoke hardware by an order of magnitude
on the workload that matters for mining. FlowCoin preserves Bitcoin's
economic model (21 M supply, halving every 210,000 blocks, 10-minute
target) and otherwise keeps hashing and signing at the cheapest
suitable primitives (keccak256d for block IDs, Ed25519 for signatures).


1. Introduction

Commerce on the Internet has come to rely almost exclusively on
financial institutions serving as trusted third parties to process
electronic payments. Bitcoin demonstrated that a peer-to-peer cash
system is viable, using SHA-256d proof-of-work to secure the chain.
However, the SHA-256d mining ecosystem has become dominated by
purpose-built ASICs, concentrating hash power in the hands of a few
manufacturers and industrial operations. This centralization
undermines the original "one-CPU-one-vote" vision.

FlowCoin preserves Bitcoin's architecture — UTXO ledger, 10-minute
blocks, 21 M supply, Nakamoto consensus — and replaces only what
caused the centralization: the proof-of-work function. Rather than
invent a new PoW, we adopt RandomX, the algorithm that has kept
Monero CPU-mineable since 2019. This is a deliberate choice of a
battle-tested design over theoretical novelty.

The network will not be ASIC-free in the future-proof sense; any
algorithm can eventually be ASIC'd given sufficient economic
incentive. The bet is more modest: a VM-based PoW with a 2 GiB
working set that is already aligned with what general-purpose CPUs
do well keeps the ASIC premium small enough that ordinary hardware
remains competitive. RandomX's six-year incumbency with no ASIC
release is the strongest empirical evidence we have.


2. Transactions

We define an electronic coin as a chain of digital signatures. Each
owner transfers the coin to the next by signing a hash of the
previous transaction and the public key of the next owner.

FlowCoin uses Ed25519 signatures (RFC 8032) rather than ECDSA:

  - Deterministic signatures — no random nonce, removing an entire
    class of key-leaking vulnerabilities.
  - Batch verification — speeds up block validation.
  - Compact sizes — 32-byte public keys and 64-byte signatures.
  - Hardened against side-channel attacks by design.

Addresses use Bech32m with human-readable prefix "fl", producing
addresses such as fl1q7m63z5rzxxg65...  The encoding includes an
error-detection checksum and is case-insensitive, reducing
transcription errors.


3. Timestamp Server

The solution begins with a timestamp server. A timestamp server
works by taking a hash of a block of items to be timestamped and
publishing the hash. Each timestamp includes the previous
timestamp, forming a chain, with each additional timestamp
reinforcing the ones before it.

FlowCoin's block header is 92 bytes (unsigned) with the following
layout:

  Field              Bytes    Description
  -------            -----    -----------
  prev_hash           32      keccak256d of previous block header
  merkle_root         32      Merkle root of transaction IDs
  height               8      Block height (uint64, little-endian)
  timestamp            8      Unix timestamp (int64, little-endian)
  nbits                4      Compact difficulty target
  nonce                4      Mining nonce (uint32, little-endian)
  version              4      Protocol version

The full signed header is 188 bytes, appending the miner's 32-byte
Ed25519 public key and 64-byte signature over bytes 0-91.

A block is identified by two distinct hashes:

  block_id  = keccak256d(header[0..91])
  pow_hash  = RandomX(header[0..91], seed)

The block_id is what every other block, every P2P message, every
RPC response, every merkle proof, every wallet record refers to.
keccak256d is cheap (a few microseconds per header) so chain-internal
operations stay fast. The pow_hash is what miners search for and
what target-comparison uses; it is computed only at block production
and at validation time, never for chain bookkeeping.


4. Proof-of-Work

The proof-of-work involves scanning for a nonce such that, for a
given block header and a seed derived from the chain state, the
RandomX hash is at or below the target value:

  RandomX(header[0..91], seed) <= target(nbits)

RandomX is a memory-hard PoW designed for CPUs. A single invocation
does, in order:

  1. Initialise a 4 KiB scratchpad with AES-based mixing.
  2. Execute a pseudo-randomly generated program of 256 instructions
     against the scratchpad and a shared 2 GiB dataset, looping
     eight times.
  3. Finalise the scratchpad with AES and produce a 256-bit digest
     via Blake2b.

The instruction mix is deliberately chosen to match the issue width
and execution-port distribution of general-purpose CPUs. The program
is regenerated from the program counter each round, and both the
scratchpad and dataset are accessed with data-dependent indices,
which prevents a straightforward hard-wired pipeline implementation.
The 2 GiB dataset forces a working set that exceeds any reasonable
on-die SRAM budget, so even a custom ASIC must source bytes from
off-die memory at roughly the same bandwidth as a commodity CPU.

The practical consequence, observed continuously since 2019 on
Monero's network, is that a 32-thread consumer CPU beats a
flagship GPU by roughly 10× on the workload, and no ASIC has been
offered for sale in those five years.


4.1 Why RandomX over a Hash-Only PoW

Keccak, SHA-3, and double-SHA-256 all share a property that
undermines decentralisation: they are cheap to implement. A
straightforward Keccak-f[1600] unit fits comfortably on silicon,
state is small enough to pin in registers, and the absence of
control flow makes the pipeline trivial to hard-wire. The mining
ecosystem reflects this — every pure-hash PoW of non-trivial
economic weight is ASIC-dominated.

RandomX removes all three of those properties:

  (a) Generated code. Each block requires executing a fresh
      program of 256 instructions drawn from an instruction set
      that includes integer, floating-point, and control-flow ops.
      A fixed-function pipeline cannot run arbitrary programs; a
      competitive implementation needs a general-purpose decode/
      issue stage — i.e., a CPU.

  (b) Memory-bandwidth bound. The 2 GiB dataset is accessed with
      data-dependent addresses at every outer iteration. An ASIC
      gains no advantage over a commodity CPU on the bottleneck
      (DRAM bandwidth per chip).

  (c) Floating-point determinism. RandomX includes IEEE-754
      double-precision arithmetic with deterministic rounding modes.
      An ASIC omitting FPU support cannot run the algorithm.


4.2 Seed Rotation

The RandomX program generator is keyed on a 32-byte seed. The seed
for the block at height h is the hash of an earlier block:

  seed(h) = block_id(rx_seed_height(h))
  rx_seed_height(h) = ((h - 64 - 1) & ~(2048 - 1))   for h > 2048 + 64
                   = 0                               otherwise

The seed therefore advances on 2048-block epoch boundaries, with a
64-block lag so nodes converge on the new seed before it takes
effect and so short reorgs across the boundary do not require
re-initialising the cache. Each rotation forces every participant
to rebuild the 2 GiB dataset from the new seed; this prevents a
hostile miner from amortising pre-computed tables across the life
of the chain. A full node that only verifies blocks can instead
run RandomX in light mode, which uses only the 256 MiB Argon2d
cache at roughly 40 H/s per thread — slow to mine with, more than
fast enough to catch invalid blocks.


5. Network

The steps to run the network are as follows:

  1) New transactions are broadcast to all nodes.
  2) Each node collects new transactions into a block.
  3) Each node works on finding a proof-of-work for its block.
  4) When a node finds a proof-of-work, it broadcasts the block.
  5) Nodes accept the block only if all transactions in it are
     valid and not already spent.
  6) Nodes express their acceptance by working on the next block
     with the accepted block as its parent.

The peer-to-peer protocol uses a binary wire format:

  [4 magic] [12 command] [4 size] [4 checksum] [payload]

Nodes maintain both IPv4 and IPv6 connections simultaneously. A
persistent 64-bit node identity (node_id) is exchanged during the
version handshake so that two connections from different addresses
belonging to the same physical node are recognised and deduplicated.


6. Incentive

By convention, the first transaction in a block creates new coins
owned by the block's producer. This both incentivises nodes to
support the network and distributes coins into circulation without
a central authority.

The block reward follows Bitcoin's halving schedule:

  Blocks 0 - 209,999:           50 FLOW per block
  Blocks 210,000 - 419,999:     25 FLOW per block
  Blocks 420,000 - 629,999:     12.5 FLOW per block
  ...continuing to halve every 210,000 blocks.

The maximum supply is 21,000,000 FLOW, with the smallest unit
being 1 satoshi (1 / 100,000,000 FLOW). Target block time is
10 minutes. Difficulty retargets every 2,016 blocks using Bitcoin's
algorithm, clamped to a 4× adjustment per period.


7. Disk Space

Once the latest block has enough confirmations, spent transactions
can be pruned to save disk space. Blocks are stored in flat files
(blk00000.dat, blk00001.dat, ...) with a maximum size of 128 MiB
per file. The UTXO set is maintained in an SQLite database with
WAL mode enabled so block validation can read the set concurrently
with writes.


8. Simplified Payment Verification

A user can verify payments without running a full node by keeping
the block-header chain and obtaining a Merkle branch for each
transaction of interest. Because block IDs are keccak256d — not
RandomX — SPV clients only need to keep keccak-chain continuity;
they never need to allocate the 256 MiB RandomX cache. One year of
10-minute blocks produces approximately 4.8 MiB of headers.


9. Privacy

As an additional firewall, a new key pair is used for each
transaction. FlowCoin enforces this for coinbase outputs by
automatically generating a fresh address for every mined block,
using SLIP-0010 HD derivation (path m/44'/9555'/0'/0/i) from a
master seed stored in the encrypted wallet.dat file.

Wallet encryption uses AES-256-CBC with a key derived from the
user's passphrase. Private keys can be imported and exported.


10. Calculations

An attacker trying to generate an alternate chain faster than the
honest chain faces the same probabilistic constraints as in Bitcoin.
The probability of an attacker catching up from z blocks behind is:

  q_z = (q/p)^z    if p > q

where p is the probability the honest network finds the next block,
q the probability the attacker does. The Nakamoto analysis is
algorithm-independent; the useful question for FlowCoin is not
whether the formula holds — it does — but what it costs the
attacker to achieve q > p. Here the choice of RandomX over a
pure-hash PoW changes the answer qualitatively.


10.1 Why the 51 % cost tracks DRAM, not silicon

In a SHA-256d chain, hash-rate is roughly proportional to silicon
gate count: the compression function fits in a few hundred gates,
state is small enough to pin in flip-flops, and the pipeline has
no control flow. The marginal cost of one more H/s is therefore
very close to the marginal cost of one more gate — small, fixed
by process node, and improvable by a small number of ASIC
designers. A state-level attacker can, in principle, fab more
silicon than every other participant combined faster than the
community can respond.

RandomX inverts this. The bottleneck in each hash is not logic
but memory: data-dependent addresses into the 2 GiB dataset force
a DRAM transaction on almost every outer iteration. Hash rate
therefore scales with DRAM bandwidth per machine, not with gate
count per die. The economic consequences are:

  (a) DRAM bandwidth is a commodity. The six companies that
      manufacture DRAM (Samsung, SK Hynix, Micron, and a handful
      of smaller fabs) compete on price across every consumer
      and datacentre channel. A RandomX-dedicated chip with, say,
      8 DRAM channels performs roughly the same as a server CPU
      with 8 DRAM channels — the chip cannot be made faster than
      physics allows the DRAM pins to toggle. There is no
      silicon advantage waiting to be exploited.

  (b) Supply cannot be covertly scaled. A SHA-256 ASIC attacker
      can quietly tape out at a single foundry. A RandomX
      attacker needs to source DRAM modules at scale, which
      shows up in the channel: large orders move prices and are
      visible to competitors and exchanges.

  (c) Cost scales linearly with CPU-thread count. At roughly
      1,000–1,500 H/s per modern CPU core, a 51 % attack at a
      network size of N threads requires buying or renting on
      the order of N more threads. Because those threads are
      general-purpose compute, they retain resale value on
      failure of the attack — but that salvage value caps how
      much an attacker is willing to invest, since it is roughly
      the price of used CPUs on the open market at the time the
      attack fails.

  (d) Cloud rental is bounded by visible capacity. The three
      hyperscalers together offer a finite number of CPU cores
      at any moment. A 51 %-scale rental of RandomX-suitable
      cores would saturate that capacity and alert operators,
      who have both the ability and the commercial incentive to
      refuse the workload once identified.

None of these guarantees that no 51 % attack is ever possible.
The claim is narrower: a RandomX attack costs roughly the price
of buying or renting commodity compute at near-retail rates,
whereas a SHA-256d attack can cost the marginal price of silicon
inside a vertically-integrated operation. The ratio is large
enough to matter.


10.2 Empirical reference point

Monero has run RandomX continuously since November 2019 on a
network that, as of this writing, sustains several GH/s of
aggregate hashrate. No RandomX ASIC has been offered for sale
in that time, despite Monero's market cap providing ample
economic incentive. This is the strongest available evidence
that the memory-bandwidth argument holds in practice — and it
is what FlowCoin is inheriting.


11. Technical Specifications

  Parameter                  Value
  ---------                  -----
  PoW algorithm              RandomX v2 (2 GiB dataset, 256 MiB cache)
  PoW seed rotation          Every 2,048 blocks, 64-block lag
  Block ID hash              keccak256d (pad = 0x01)
  Block time target          600 seconds (10 minutes)
  Initial block reward       50 FLOW
  Halving interval           210,000 blocks
  Maximum supply             21,000,000 FLOW
  Difficulty retarget        Every 2,016 blocks
  Retarget clamp             4× maximum adjustment
  Minimum target (diff 1)    nbits = 0x1d00ffff (Bitcoin-compatible)
  Signatures                 Ed25519 (RFC 8032)
  Address format             Bech32m, prefix "fl"
  HD derivation              SLIP-0010 (m/44'/9555'/0'/0/i)
  P2P port                   9333
  RPC port                   9334
  Block header (unsigned)    92 bytes
  Block header (signed)      188 bytes
  Smallest unit              1 satoshi = 10^-8 FLOW
  Coin type (BIP-44)         9555


12. Implementation

The reference implementation is written in C++20 and is available at
https://github.com/KristianPilatovich/flowcoin. It comprises three
binaries: flowcoind (the full node), flowcoin-cli (the RPC client),
and flowcoin-miner (the standalone CPU miner).

flowcoin-miner talks to flowcoind over HTTP JSON-RPC: it calls
getblocktemplate (which now returns the RandomX seed alongside the
header template) and submitblock (a hex-encoded signed block). One
RandomX VM per worker thread scans a disjoint nonce stripe; found
blocks are signed with a locally-held Ed25519 key and submitted via
RPC. The miner does not run a P2P stack or maintain chain state of
its own, so it can run on hosts far smaller than the node.

Expected hashrate is roughly 1,000–1,500 H/s per modern CPU core
in full-memory mode. A 24-thread consumer CPU therefore delivers
on the order of 15–30 kH/s, which at difficulty 1 means blocks
arrive in a few minutes rather than hours. The difficulty retarget
algorithm is the same as Bitcoin's; as more miners join, the
per-node expected time adjusts back toward 10 minutes.


13. Conclusion

We have proposed a peer-to-peer electronic cash system that pairs
Bitcoin's proven economic model with RandomX, the proof-of-work
that has kept Monero CPU-mineable for more than five years. The
design separates the two concerns a block-hash function has to
serve: a fast chain-internal identifier (keccak256d, used
everywhere in the protocol) and a mining-cost function (RandomX,
used only at block production and validation). By reusing a
proven CPU-only PoW instead of inventing a new one, we inherit
six years of adversarial review without asking users to trust a
novel construction. By preserving Bitcoin's halving schedule,
supply cap, and 10-minute block target, we inherit a monetary
policy that users already understand.


References

[1] S. Nakamoto, "Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System,"
    2008. https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf

[2] tevador, "RandomX," 2019.
    https://github.com/tevador/RandomX

[3] tevador, "RandomX: Design notes."
    https://github.com/tevador/RandomX/blob/master/doc/design.md

[4] G. Bertoni, J. Daemen, M. Peeters, G. Van Assche, "Keccak,"
    https://keccak.team/keccak.html

[5] D. J. Bernstein, N. Duif, T. Lange, P. Schwabe, B.-Y. Yang,
    "High-speed high-security signatures," Journal of Cryptographic
    Engineering 2(2):77-89, 2012.

[6] P. Wuille, "Bech32m format for v1+ witness addresses," BIP 350,
    2020.

[7] SLIP-0010, "Universal private key derivation from master private
    key," SatoshiLabs, 2016.
